---
layout: page
title: About
---

Welcome! :smile: My name is Braden Hitchcock. I'm a software engineer at
Northrop Grumman in Boulder, Colorado. I have a bachelor's degree in C.S. from
Brigham Young University, a master's degree in C.S. with an emphasis in software
innovation from Oregon State University, and about 5 years of professional
software experience under my belt. I'm passionate about software architecture,
particularly as it pertains to hard real-time systems that process large amounts
of data, and I look forward to the many challenges and opportunities that lie
ahead!

My motivation for sharing my important experiences and insights through this
site can be summarized in the three words of my professional mantra: innovate,
instruct, and inspire.

## Innovate

I'm passionate about new software and technologies. The industry is fast-paced,
and keeping up with it can be challenging. I hope to be able to document my
experiences with new ideas and tech-stacks and ultimately summarize my
contributions to the novel technologies of the future.

## Instruct

My football coach/math teacher in high school (shout out to Coach Johnson!) used
to say that "you remember 93% of what you teach." By providing overviews of the
knowledge I gain over the years to come, I hope to not only provide a place for
others to learn, but also create a process that helps me remember what I will
learn.

## Inspire

If no one can take anything from my site and use it to improve their skills,
then there is really no point to me doing this. The greatest achievement I could
possible make is to be, as Dr. Danny Dig puts it, a "catalyst of change" and
motivate others to try new things and improve their skills.

## Here We Go!

I hope you'll tune in occasionally to see what new insights, tutorials, lessons,
and technologies may be available on this site!
